The script performing all necessary operations is in "run_analysis.R". To get things done the function run_analysis() should be loaded and invoked. No parameters are required.
First of all the script checks whether the directory containing the data exists. If it does not the programe aborts. Otherwise scripts is executing.

The programe starts from reading names of variables and selecting those corresponding to means and standard deviations of each variable. Secondly, the names are transformed into more readable format. For example, letters "t" and "f", indicating in which domain a measurement is done, turn to a more explicit form such as  "TimeDomain" or "FreqDomain". In another vector numbers of the selected columns  are stored (to seethe further the measurement data).  Then for each set the measurement data is loaded alongside with numbers of individuals and numbers corresponding to performed activities.  Activities are transformed from numeric to descriptive text format (stating explicitly like "laying" etc.). To do this the sapply function is used. Number of measurement variables are reduced to 64. Finally three data frames are bound (measurements, individuals and activities).
Next step combines test and train samples. Resulting set is grouped by Subject and Activity variables.  Then averages for each subject-activity pair are computed. Totally it gives 180 rows (30 individuals perform 6 activities ). It's done through the usage of data.table package.The data is written into text file.